---
title: Aloha revisited
date: 2021-02-21
description: Hello:goodbye pt. 2
tags: [foolish, interludes]
epistemic:
  status: "1. not sure of this, likely to change over time"
  effort: "3. did some editing"
---

> Enter the room, _aloha_. Leave the room, _aloha_.

I usually have a quiet hour each day before anyone else gets up, if you ignore the fogginess of getting out of bed that walks with me as I fumble my way downstairs, and if you discount the clamouring of Scallywag (remember him?) to get outside (so that he can get back inside for breakfast, _aloha_).

And so, for the last couple of mornings, I’ve been attempting to _aloha_ every space in the house as I move around it.

It’s challenging. First of all, I don’t have time if I move at normal speed, so I have to slow down. But speed is generated by thought: _I want tea_, zooom! and I’m in the kitchen before I notice.

It’s the transitional spaces that miss out: landing, stairs, hallway, space by the backdoor (that’s Scally’s fault, he won’t allow me pause). Make the tea, wake up eldest daughter – that’s six spaces to move through, but only one _goodbye_ and one _hello_.

_Must. slow. down._

So I do. And what happens?

This body awakens from its deep slumber, the one that tastes like rush. The one that presses for action beyond the speed of thought. Instead, a stretching out occurs, of time and of body.

I learn that my state of being – which has always been framed as _the way I am_ – is _forwards_. I learn that, by saying goodbye over my departing shoulder (I haven’t turned to face the room when saying farewell yet), I have a back. I mean, I know I have a back – I can sort of see it in the mirror; I lean it against my desk chair; I lengthen it when requiring resolve. Saying goodbye gives me the sensation of my back though. Suddenly it opens to the room I’m quitting and there is a momentary mingling with the space. The farewell becomes a touch, a stroke, an exchange.

As I slow down and move through the house this way, my back chooses to stay open a bit longer, and the spaces become active – they communicate with me. As I approach a threshold, there is already a goodbye-ing between back and room prior to the words slipping out of my mouth.

I am balanced momentarily by the departing space at my back and the arriving space at my front. I am expanded by these two rooms. They come alive – no longer empty vessels for the things I notice, need, or want – they have their own sensations that they are willing to share with me.
